The prostate gland helps make semen
and is part of the male reproductive system.
It is below a man’s bladder,
on top of the penis
and in front of the rectum.
It surrounds the urethra,
which carries urine from the bladder
out through the penis.
Prostate cancer occurs
because instead of growing and
dying in a normal way,
abnormal gland cells divide
and grow uncontrollably
and don’t die.
Cancer cells can spread from one
area or mass to surrounding tissue,
and travel through your bloodstream
or lymph system
to other parts of your body.
Early prostate cancer often
causes no symptoms
and is diagnosed during routine screening
with a prostate-specific antigen test,
or PSA,
or during a digital rectal exam.
If the tumor pushes on the
bladder or urethra,
it can cause problems with urination.
Such symptoms are also common
with noncancerous conditions
such as an enlarged prostate.
Other possible symptoms of
prostate cancer include
blood in the urine or semen,
erectile dysfunction,
and pain in the lower back,
hips, or upper thighs.
Treatment for prostate cancer depends
on many factors including
how fast it is growing,
whether it has spread,
your age, and potential side effects.
Options include surgical removal of the gland,
called a prostatectomy;
radiation therapy;
hormone therapy;
and watchful waiting.
Sometimes combination treatments are used.